The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hospital Bulletin, Vol. V, No. 2, April
15, 1909, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Hospital Bulletin, Vol. V, No. 2, April 15, 1909

Author: Various

Release Date: December 29, 2016 [EBook #53827]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOSPITAL BULLETIN, APRIL 15, 1909 ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)






------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         THE HOSPITAL BULLETIN


      Published Monthly in the Interest of the Medical Department
                     of the University of Maryland

                          PRICE $1.00 PER YEAR

        Contributions invited from the Alumni of the University.
                    Business Address, Baltimore, Md.

                  Entered at the Baltimore Post-office
                        as Second Class Matter.

            VOL. V BALTIMORE, Md., APRIL 15, 1909      No. 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                THE ETHICS OF THE GENERAL PRACTITIONER.

             _An Address delivered Before the University of
                     Maryland Medical Association,
                            March 16, 1909_,

                          BY GUY STEELE, M. D.
                           Of Cambridge, Md.


A celebrated divine once said that the most difficult part of a sermon
was the selection of a proper text. I must thank the President of this
society for saving me this trouble. When, however, Webster's is
consulted for a proper definition of the word "Ethics," and it is found
to mean "The science of human duty," it would seem that he has chosen a
text almost too comprehensive for the limits of a short paper, even when
restricted to the "ethics of the medical profession." It may not be out
of place to thank him for the honor he has conferred upon me by deeming
one whose student days are scarce twelve years behind him worthy of
presenting this subject to you, for a paper on this topic is almost of
itself a sermon, and we naturally look up to those, whose many years of
experience and works have brought them prominence, for instruction in
morals and duty. Still, I take it, whether young or old, all of us like
to preach on fitting occasions, and not the least part of the
inspiration to effort is the character of the audience. My invitation
was to read a paper before the Clinical Society, and incidentally I was
told that some of the students had expressed a desire to be present.
Little, however, did I anticipate such a flattering attendance from them
when examination time so nearly approached, and it is evidence of a most
commendable spirit when they can bring themselves to take even an hour
of their most valuable time from study to devote to a consideration of
the moral duties and responsibilities which shall be theirs when they
shall have passed through the April ordeal. Much that I have to say
tonight will be directed especially to them, and if they or their elders
in the profession may in the years to come look back upon this night
with the recollection that I have more forcibly brought to mind some of
the old and half-forgotten maxims and axioms that make for a better and
purer professional life, I will have been more than repaid for the time
I have expended in the preparation of this paper.

In discussing the ethics of the general practitioner towards his
patient, I would have you remember that your first and most important
duty is to give to those who trust you the very best that is in you.

To you young men, full of enthusiasm for your new profession, and imbued
with Utopian ideas of the mission which you have undertaken for the good
of mankind, it would seem almost foolish for me to mention this as the
first advice I would offer you. But I think I can see a smile of
understanding flit across the faces of those who have for some years
fought the battle of life, and who have had the wire edge of early
ambitions and determinations blunted by contact with unappreciative
patients and unworthy professional competition and the daily incidents
of a busy life. They know that it is very easy to feel too tired, or be
too busy, or have some other engrossing affair in mind which prevents
that entire devotion to duty which all admit is essential to success in
medicine. Half of success in life or in any undertaking is due to a
successful start; therefore, let me ask you to firmly determine on one
or two fixed principles, and to stick to those principles through thick
and thin. Be fully assured that no halfway devotion to your profession
will ever bring you prominence or success. The time-worn phrase that
"Medicine is a jealous mistress" loses none of its truth by frequent
repetition. Recently I saw in a prominent medical journal the advice
given that doctors should take a prominent part in politics and bring
themselves forward in other ways, and that thereby in some way unknown
to me the glory of the profession would be enhanced, and much benefit
result to the community. Far be it from me to discourage a proper civic
spirit and a proper interest in public affairs, or to advise an
avoidance of any duty which good citizenship imposes upon every honest,
patriotic man, whatever his business or profession. But I take it that
no more baneful, no more dangerous advice can be given to our young
professional man than this. You cannot be successful in both politics
and medicine, and while we can point to one member of our profession in
the United States Senate, and to some notable exceptions in our own
State, where men of our profession have, for a time, abandoned medicine
and returned to it to win success, you can rest assured that the medical
politician possesses little beyond a musty diploma to remind the world
that he was once of our cult. So don't be a halfway politician and
halfway doctor. Success in either field will take all of your best
effort and all of your time.

What I have said of politics will apply, though not quite so forcibly,
to any other engrossing business or pleasure. Time forbids me to
elaborate this idea, and in concluding it let me say that you cannot be
a successful politician, merchant, sport or what not and carry medicine
as a side line.

It may seem useless to remind you that, in order to give the best that
is in you, you must keep abreast with what is new and best in
professional literature and scientific progress. You all have determined
to be students, and even those who pride themselves on having passed
through the University without having opened a book have a half-formed
desire to really know something beyond spotting a possible examination
question, and when once examinations are over, and they have reluctantly
withdrawn themselves from the delights of the city by gaslight for the
pine woods and mountain trail, they will burn the midnight oil and
browse diligently through their musty tomes. May I tell you that nothing
is harder than to find time for study. Many of us, even though city men,
with the best and latest literature at our elbows, are ashamed to think
how thoroughly we abhor the sight of a medical book or magazine, and how
easily we can persuade ourselves that we are too tired and stale, and so
engrossed during the day with scenes of sickness and suffering that we
must have our brief hours of release from duty for recreation. We do
need our hours of relaxation and rest and our too infrequent holidays,
and they are absolutely essential to good health and good work. Don't,
however, confuse the words rest and relaxation with sloth and idleness,
and don't think your professional work completed when your round of
daily visits is done. Indeed, if you would know medicine you must woo
your mistress in the small hours of the night, and in many of the
leisure moments that the day may bring you.

Much has been spoken of the man who practices by common sense, and whose
school has been that of observation and hard experience. A most worthy
brother he is at times, and many are his friends and wonderful his
success. But if the science of medicine is to advance, more is required
for progress than mere common sense, and observation untrained and
experience undirected and unguided by the observation and experience of
others will rarely discover a new bacillus or elaborate a side chain
theory. So, to be truly ethical in the duty you owe to give the best
that is in you, you should be reading men. Take one or more of the
medical journals. Buy for reference the latest and best text-books. Make
the opportunity to read the daily papers and something of current
literature. A well-rounded man can afford to do nothing less. Besides
the information you obtain, it pays in the respect of the community to
have the reputation of being posted in your profession. Often the
country man simply hasn't time at home to read. A busy life, with its
miles upon miles of dusty roads to travel, precludes all chance for the
easy chair. Then cultivate the habit of reading while driving. Many are
the useful and happy hours I have spent in my carriage with my journals
and magazines. I am frank to say that, but for this habit, I never could
have found time for one-half of the reading I have done. Last year I was
somewhat amused when a most worthy, well-educated and well-posted man
summed up his opinion of another by saying that he was one of those who
read magazines in his carriage. If I mistake not, this indictment was
brought against the late Dr. Miltenberger, who as a young and busy man
was forced to form this habit, and I could but think that, could I die
with half the honor and respect and love that were his, I could plead
guilty to even this mark of devotion to my profession and desire to
advance in it.

Would you be ethical in giving the best that is in you to your patients,
you must give ungrudgingly of your time. This may again seem a useless
piece of advice, and yet almost all of us are familiar with the man
whose motto is "Veni, Vidi, Vici"--"I came, I saw, I conquered." This
intuitive diagnostician is by no means a myth. The man who comes in a
rush and goes in a rush, and who, with pencil in one hand and
prescription pad in the other, feels the pulse while the thermometer is
under the tongue; who sees at a glance, without necessity of personal or
family history or of physical examination, just what is the matter, and
who, giving four or five prescriptions, rushes out, trusting that
something in his shotgun therapy may hit the enemy. Perhaps the next day
he prescribes four or five more remedies or combination of remedies, and
should the patient begin to improve, prides himself that he has made and
confirmed a diagnosis by his experimental therapy. Is it necessary for
me to say that no ethical man with any regard for the rights of his
patients and his obligation to his profession can really practice
medicine in this manner? The plea that you are too busy to give the
proper time to your cases is no justification for your neglect. Anything
less than a careful inquiry into family and personal history, followed
by a painstaking and thorough physical examination, is unjust to your
patient and unjust to yourself. No ethical man can give the best that is
in him by doing less than this. If you haven't the time to do your work
thoroughly, make a clean breast of the matter and take fewer cases. But
you will say that a man, even in large practice, cannot afford to give
any of it up. He needs every dollar that honestly comes his way, and to
say that he hasn't time for his work is only another way of throwing
practice into the hands of a rival. This is, indeed, a proposition hard
to solve, as most of us do need every dollar that honestly comes our
way; but if our work is only half done, if we have neglected some
important point in diagnosis, and thereby omitted some equally important
measure in treatment, have our dollars been honestly earned? Let us
start out with and carry in mind this axiom of a truly ethical life,
that success in medicine cannot be measured by commercial success; that,
while no sensible man can neglect the business side of his vocation, or
refuse to demand and collect just compensation for his service, such
compensation cannot be measured in dollars and cents alone; that a good
conscience and whole-souled devotion to duty, giving ungrudgingly of the
very best that is in you to those that have confided in you, will be
your very best asset when the final account is made up.

May I impress the fact upon you that an ethical man, with a just
appreciation of his duty to his patients, can never be a vendor of
patent or unofficial medicines. Indeed, I would be lacking in my duty
if, with the opportunity this paper offers me, I did not, from the
standpoint of experience, impress upon you with all of the force at my
command the necessity of being wary of the detail man and the alluring
advertising literature with which your mail will be flooded. You will
scarcely have opened your office, and be waiting with what patience you
can command that rush of the halt, the lame and the blind to which you
feel that your talents entitle you, before the suave detail man, having
heard of the new field, puts in his appearance. What you lack in
therapeutic experience he can supply you by drawing liberally on the
experience of others who have worked little less than miracles in an
adjoining town by the use of his pills and potions, his elixirs and
tinctures. You will find him smooth and oily, placid and plausible. He
knows his story well, and even by his much speaking can almost persuade
you that what you knew, or thought you knew, or what you had recently
been taught, were all out of date; that by some stroke of genius the
chemist of his house had discovered some way by which compatibles would
combine with incompatibles into the formation of a new and staple
mixture, possessing all of the virtues and none of the defects of its
original constituents, rendering chloral as soothing as the strings of a
lute and as harmless as the cooing of a dove, extracting from cod-liver
oil every disagreeable feature and leaving nothing but its supposed
virtues behind. He will show you the short road to fortune and success.
Treat him kindly; the ethical man should not be rude, and brusqueness is
not a sign of Roman honesty or virtue. Be assured he feels his position
keenly, and is dreading the catechism which will sooner or later display
his ignorance of everything but the story that has been drilled into him
like a parrot.

There has been no greater shame in our profession than the influence
these men and their houses have exercised, and incidentally the
indorsements and recommendations that thoughtless men have furnished
them. The blame is all ours, and we cannot shun it. We pride ourselves
on our scientific attainments; that we take nothing for granted; and,
now that the age of empiricism has passed, we accept nothing that does
not bear the stamp of scientific approval. And yet, before the campaign
of the American Medical Association and the revelations of Collier's and
the Ladies' Home Journal, we accepted our treatment from the hands of
the manufacturing houses, and dosed our patients with nostrums about
which we knew nothing except the statements of those whose sole purpose
it was to sell. There are few of us who have been many years in practice
to whom a blush of shame does not come at the recollection of our
gullibility and our guilty innocence. Can any man deem it ethical to
give even to a good dog something about which he was totally ignorant?
And yet this is just what we were doing. A short time ago a particularly
shrewd detail man was discussing this very point with me, and claiming
that, as the formula was now required by law to be printed in each
bottle and package, this most formidable objection could not now hold
good. Handing me a bottle of his patent cure-all, he glibly called my
attention to the six or seven ingredients, with the amount of each
contained in the fluid ounce. Among other potent quantities I can recall
1-48 gr. of morphia and 1-240 gr. of strychnia. The dose was a
teaspoonful three times a day. Any man can imagine the more than
homeopathic effect of 1-48 gr. of morphia divided into eight doses.
These well-known and well-tried drugs were not, however, the life of the
nostrum, and presently we came to the twenty minims to the fluid ounce
of the fluid extract of the drug from which the remedy derived its name.
Something I had never heard of. Something unlisted in the U. S. P.
Something discovered and owned and controlled by this house alone. As my
ignorance became more apparent his eloquence increased, and I have no
doubt that a few years ago, before my moral conscience had become
aroused to the therapeutic sin of prescribing something whose botanical
family, whose chemical formula, and even whose physiological effects
were totally unknown to me, I would gladly have accepted a sample and
would have tried it on some poor soul too poor to pay for a
prescription. It is nothing short of a shame to think of what we have
done in this line. The sin has been one of carelessness and laziness
rather than of ignorance. Here we had ready to hand some remedy,
beautiful to the eye, palatable to the tongue; then why take the time
and trouble to bother about constructing a formula of our own when
someone else of equal experience had constructed one for us? I am ready
to thank God that most of these nostrums are as harmless as they are
beautiful, and, while I may not have done good, I rarely did harm by
their use. I am not discussing the opium and cocaine laden classes. I
wish to emphasize incalculable harm that must result to the physician
himself who allows someone to do his thinking for him. I am also
referring to the attitude of the ethical man to his patient, and beg to
ask if we are doing even part of our duty when we are doing no harm.
Allow me to conclude this topic by asking you to spend an hour some day
in casually glancing over (a deep study would fully repay you) the pages
of the U. S. P., or a list of the remedies that have in one year
received the sanction of the Council on Pharmacy of American Medical
Association. If you don't find enough drugs and combinations to meet
every case and every conceivable situation, you had better desert
practice and exploit some wonderful cure-all as a detail man.

If we, as physicians, had nothing but our duty to our patients to
consider, and incidentally our own profit and glory, the practice of
medicine would soon degenerate into a mere trade. I may even say that,
had we nothing but the promptings of our consciences to keep us in the
straight and narrow path, if we had nothing but the knowledge of work
well done, and if the desire and determination to give the best that is
in us were our only incentives to an ethical life, the profession would
be so beset by the temptations of commercialism, and the notoriety and
prominence which commercial success brings, that the halls of Esculapius
would soon need a scouring and purging greater than Hercules gave the
Augean stables. Despite the high incentive to all that is best and
purest in life which our noblest of callings should beget in us,
physicians are only human, and human weakness, like disease, is no
respecter of persons or of callings. It may have been that the medical
fathers, with a knowledge of the temptations to which they were
subjected, and a desire to save others from the pitfalls which beset
their paths, were imbued with a determination to place their profession
on a higher plane than others; or it may have been the natural evolution
which inevitably resulted from and followed the promptings of man to
help his fellow-man, to devote himself to the relief of pain and
sickness, to sacrifice his comfort and ease and almost every pleasure in
order that others might have ease of body and peace of mind and soul,
which from the earliest days have placed medicine as a profession apart,
and have imposed upon those who have entered its ranks certain standards
of conduct and insisted on certain ethical relations which have lifted
it above mere questions of gain and the vain acquisition of renown. We
have been taught that Hippocrates himself was great not only as a
physician, but greater still as an ethical teacher who has left with us
certain maxims and proverbs which, though handed down through the ages,
have lost none of their truth and none of their spotless morality. Even
in the Middle Ages, when learning, not to say science, had sunk into
such an abyss of ignorance that the ability to write one's name lifted
one into the ranks of the educated, when human ills were relieved more
often with the sword than with the scalpel, the leech was a man apart.
His education, his scientific investigations, and even his supposed
communion and partnership with the evil one, placed his on a pedestal
above other professional callings. Then, as now, though men might scoff
at our profession of superior knowledge and skill, when "pallida mors"
stalked abroad or knocked at the hovels of the poor or palaces of the
rich, all arose to call us blessed. It has been often said that, could a
medical man live up to the ethical standards of his profession, his
chances without creed or priest would not be small at the last great
day. But with all of our high ideals we are only mortal, and we know and
have sorrowed at the fact that many of our ethical standards are not
lived up to, and that the Hippocratic law is frequently more honored in
the breach than in the observance.

We have in every community where one or two are gathered together in the
name of medicine the man who is everything to your face and everything
else behind your back; who damns by faint praise; who sympathizes with
you in your sorrows and trials, who visits the family of the patient you
have lost to assure them of your skill and to insist that everything was
done that could have been done, "but"----and that one harmless little
conjunction, meaning nothing in itself, is more eloquent than a thousand
terrible adjectives or burning, blistering adverbs or participles. So
many things can be said by the pious uplifting of the eyes, the
sanctimonious upturning of the palms. He would not for the world leave a
doubt in the minds of your people, and, no matter what in his inmost
heart he thinks of your mistakes (from his standpoint), it is not his
place to injure a brother, but, alas! he is not responsible for the
unguarded tongues of his friends, and he usually sees that they do his
work well for him. Often it is "if I could only have reached him
earlier," which, being interpreted, means a miracle would have been
wrought. Almost every community has its miracle worker, its medical
resurrectionist. His cases are always a little worse than others, his
victories a little more wonderful. Where you have a bronchitis, he has a
desperate pneumonia, your transitory albuminuria is with him acute
Bright's, and hopeless cases follow him to undo him, only to meet defeat
at his skillful hands. You hear that Mr. A. is desperately ill with
pneumonia on Monday, and on Friday you meet him on the street, looking
hale and hearty, firmly believing that, had Dr. X. been one hour later
in reaching him, he would ere this have been gathered to his fathers.
Should you mildly suggest that some error in diagnosis might have been
made, that even the best of us at times go wrong, and that resolution in
true pneumonia could hardly be expected in four days, you will find that
he has been prepared for you, feeling that Dr. X. has used some potent
remedy as yet unknown to you and his less skillful brethren, and firmly
convinced that your suspicions of his case are based upon your ignorance
or your jealousy of poor Dr. X., who was not there to defend himself,
who had always spoken so kindly of you, and had uttered nothing worse
than the harmless little conjunction "but"----

A little bragging is not a sin, and indeed is usually harmless, and in
the long run reacts on the miracle worker. But the ethical man does
frequently suffer from it, and it is a fact, absurd as it may seem, that
the average man or woman would much prefer to be considered at death's
door about three-fifths of the time--indeed, almost a walking
Lazarus--than to be deemed the picture and personification of vigorous
health. Dr. X. knows this, and plays upon the credulity of his patients.
He frightens them to death's door, works a miracle, and has tied them to
himself forever. We all have suffered from this, and will continue to do
so until the little grain of truth has grown from the tiny mustard seed
to the vigorous bush. Dr. X., with his faults, has his virtues. He
aspires to be the busiest man, the richest man, the most popular man in
his community. All of these ambitions, if properly guided, are laudable,
and, indeed, while enhancing his power and prestige, may be redounding
to the good of his people, for a man to be the busiest and most popular
man in his profession must usually be the best posted, the most highly
educated, the hardest working man, not only for himself, but for those
he serves. So, while we may smile at Dr. X. and his big ways, we may
love him for his virtues and forgive his small faults.

But for the man who deliberately goes to work to undermine another; who
takes advantage of some temporary absence of the regular physician to
ingratiate himself; who, appreciating the fact that people worried
nearly to death by the illness of a loved one, will forget every
obligation and desert every old friend in the hope that the new one may
offer some encouragement or extend some hope, is ready for these
emergencies. He carries satchels full of hope for all cases and
occasions. He prescribes it liberally, diluted, however, to the point of
despair because he was called in an hour too late, or because the case
had already been damaged beyond his power of repair. This gentleman
advances not only by his own deceit, but uses the power of church, of
politics, of family influence and social opportunity, to lift himself
along. Verily he has his reward, but it is not in peace of mind, not in
the honor and respect of his community, but the contempt of every honest
man, be he of the profession or laity. Not the least of the perplexing
questions which beset the man who is trying to lead an ethical life is
his duty in his relation as consultant. Indeed, there is scarcely a
situation in professional life that at times presents more embarrassing
possibilities, or calls for the exercise of more tact. It is a pleasure
to be able to bear witness to the ability of the man who has called you
to his aid, to assure the family that everything has been done that care
in diagnosis and skill in treatment could demand. But what of the cases
where gross carelessness or blind ignorance have hastened what might
easily have been delayed or averted? There is only one way here, only
one duty. Treat the man as his carelessness or his ignorance deserves.
Again, you are called in consultation with a thoroughly good man who has
given ungrudgingly of the best that is in him. Perhaps your superior
skill in certain lines, perhaps your superior opportunity to observe a
certain line of cases, have taught you something that he has not had the
chance to learn. As before it was your duty to expose the careless
ignorance of one, now it is your place to so give your opinion and
explain your position that no possible reflection can be cast upon the
other. Don't approach a consultation with the manner of a priest of
Delphi. Don't pose as the fountain of all wisdom and of all experience.
Indeed, in this work you will be surprised how often you will learn from
him you are called upon to assist. He has seen the case for days, where
you can spend but minutes with it. It is his part to bear the blame,
yours to share his fame should success crown your combined efforts.

Frequently you will be called upon when a resort to surgery is
demanded--not so much to perform the operation as to give your opinion
as to the advisability of a certain line of procedure. Having determined
what is to be done, don't assume the place of prominence. You have
little by way of reputation to gain by performing an operation that you
were known to be competent to perform or you would never have been
called. Let him do the work with your assistance and advice. In this way
you will have gained a fast friend for future consultations, and you
will have enshrined him in the esteem and confidence of his people.
Therefore, help him and uplift and bear witness to his worth, and don't
humiliate him by your airs and assumed superiority.

As a last word, don't consult with an unworthy man, for be assured that
your reputation is worth more to you than any consultation fee, however
badly you may think you need it.

The question of fees is one that must be considered. We hate to think of
the combination of medicine and money, and our patients abhor it even
more. The days once were when only the sons of the rich sought the
liberal professions. It was thought unworthy in the days of the dim ages
for a pupil of Esculapius to charge for his services. Any remuneration
that came to him was an offering of gratitude--indeed an honorarium
which might be tendered or withheld at the will of the patient. A truly
noble conception this, that the good we offered was beyond a mere
question of price. Equally comforting was the belief that the ill which
resulted despite our best efforts was no reflection on our skill, but an
evidence of the wrath of the Gods. Would that we were as near Olympus
now as then, and that the Gods walked with men to reward the worthy and
punish the unjust. Would also that the manners and costumes and climate
of Ancient Greece were still with us, so that man need take little heed
of raiment beyond a robe and sandals; that he required no expensive
outlay for instruments, no intricate electric outfit, and no automobile.
What a life ours would be if now as then our grateful patients sought
us, and we passed our many hours of leisure in eloquent discussion or in
lazy lounging amid the leafy groves or shaded porticos of the temples!
But the times have changed, and we have changed with them, and abhor as
we will the combination of medicine and money, we are forced to take
thought of the morrow and to spend many, many anxious moments in this
thought and in trying to evolve ways and means by which a balance can be
maintained between the honoraria of patients, both grateful and
ungrateful, and the claims of persistent creditors. Perhaps it is best
thus, as the average man needs some incentive to good work beyond the
acquisition of honor and glory. An axiom in the question of fees is
this, that in order to be respected we must respect ourselves, and no
one can respect himself unless he holds his calling above a trade and
bases his charges upon this feeling of respect for himself and his
profession. This axiom should be held in mind in arranging any fee
table, and should be insisted upon in our settlements with those who
think a doctor's bill should be discounted from one-quarter to one-half.
I have often wondered how this right to a discount in a doctor's bill
ever got such a firm hold in the public mind. Perhaps the city man
cannot appreciate this fact like his country brother. The poor, honest
old farmer, part of the bone and sinew of the land, expects the highest
cash price for everything that he sells. If anybody has ever heard of
one who when ten barrels of corn at $3.50 per barrel comes to $35,
offering to take $25 for his bill, he should corral and cage this rara
avis. But hundreds of us from the rural districts have been deemed mean
and close-fisted and extortionate because we gently insist that $35
worth of professional services rendered are worth $35 and not $25.

This is largely our own fault, for so many of us present a bill in one
hand and an apology in the other. We collect our bills not as if they
were our just dues, but with a half-hearted insistence, inducing our
debtor to believe that we have scruples ourselves as to the value of our
services, and that a liberal discount from the face of the bill will
about bring us to a fair settlement. It will be better for all--for
patient as well as physician--to realize that the "science of human
duty" implies a duty to oneself as well as a duty to the public, and
that a small proportion of the charity of our profession should begin at
home. To the young men I would especially give this advice: Having
settled on a fair and honest fee for your services, do not depart from
this fee. With us, as a rule, prosperity in the form of a numerous
clientage comes sooner than to the other professions. You will not long
have opened your office before you will be surprised at the number who
demand your services. There will be no doubt of the demand, for those
who pay the least invariably demand the most. Don't turn them away, for
if you properly employ your time, you will gain in experience and
occasionally a dollar or two. You will soon be enlightened as to your
popularity, for the first pay day will send most of them to another and
it is presumed easier man. Many of those who stick will tell you that
Dr. ---- never charged but 50 cents a visit, when the regular fee is
$1.00. Dr. ---- will vigorously deny this and produce his books to prove
his truth. Here is everything plain before you. Every visit is listed at
the established figure. You will rarely see his cash book, for then the
whole transaction would be plain, and you would discover the simple
manner by which in every community some supposedly ethical man is
supplanting his truly ethical brother by charging full fees and settling
for half.

Dr. ---- will cut 50 cents or a dollar from the established fees for
out-of-town work, and immensely increase his practice by it. For be it
understood the bone and sinew of the land dearly love the wholes and
halves, and will flock to sell in the dearest and pay in the cheapest
market. Don't envy this man his prosperity and, above all, don't follow
in his footsteps. Bide your time with the assurance that the man who
charges $1.00 for $2.00 worth of service rarely gives more than a
dollar's value, and that when a real emergency arises and a capable,
honest man is demanded, one who respects himself and his calling, if you
have prepared yourself and are known to give the best that is in you,
the cheap man will go to the wall and your merit will receive its
reward. If by chance any of you have not seen Dr. McCormick's paper on
this question of fees and collections, let him by all means find the
proper A. M. A. Journal and read it. It is a classic worth any man's
time and attention. In concluding this subject, let me endorse what he
says about the cheap man, the price-cutter. Whatever his charge may be,
he is usually getting full value for his services. Realizing his lack of
education or ability or temperament, or whatever it is that puts him
below his professional competitor, he cuts his fees in order to live. It
is not our place to meet his competition, but to pity him, to extend to
him the helping hand, to endeavor to elevate him to our standard, and
never to lower ourselves to his.

I have only a few words to say on the subject of professional
confidences. So sacred is the relation between the physician and patient
regarded that the courts will not compel a physician, while on the
witness stand and under oath, to tell the truth, and not only the truth,
but the whole truth, to reveal what is imparted to him in confidence by
his patient.

If in this exalted function of doing justice between man and man the
courts will not compel the recital of some important piece of evidence,
how carefully should we regard our professional relation, and see to it
that neither in strict confidence or in idle gossip do we betray the
secrets that suffering man has confided in us.

It may be somewhat out of place in a paper dealing with "The Ethics of
the General Practitioner" to speak of the tendency, or perhaps better,
the half-formed determination of the majority of every class to be
specialists. I must confine myself to the predilection of the average
medical student for surgery. It was so in my day, and I suppose it is so
now, that almost 75 per cent. of the graduating classes are thoroughly
satisfied that the end and aim of medicine is surgery; that practice and
the less spectacular branches are parts of the profession essential to
it as a whole, and fitted for those who intend to lead the plodding
life, but too slow and too prosaic for the man bursting with the
knowledge of his own brilliancy and his own special fitness. There is no
question but that this tendency has done much to lower the average
fitness of many classes. Men become listless and careless, neglecting
everything but their hobby, and while the surgical amphitheatre is
crowded, the medical clinics will be shunned, even deserted were it not
that the sections are such that the absentees can be spotted and warned.
There is no question also but that indifference to everything but
surgery is responsible for many of the failures before the State
Examining Boards. We must have surgeons, and they must begin their
training in medical schools, and it is not my purpose to discourage
earnest work and honest effort to this end. I wish, however, to say that
every ethical specialist needs a thorough grounding in the general
branches of medicine, and he should not in his student days neglect the
other essentials to a well-rounded man. Most heartily do I wish to
condemn the careless, happy-go-lucky manner in which so many men totally
unprepared and totally unsuited by temperament for this branch "rush in
where angels fear to tread." I wish especially to draw your attention to
the fact that there is a vast difference between the operator and the
surgeon. Almost any young man with a disregard of the sight of blood,
with nerves unaffected by human suffering and a heart untouched by a
knowledge of his power to do harm, can in six months' practice on the
cadaver learn to cut, to sew and to ligate with neatness and despatch.
Indeed, there may be many before me of the student body whose young and
nimble fingers could teach dexterity to the best surgeons of the city.
Very many with no pretense to this dexterity, and no equipment but a
superabundance of assurance, graduate as surgeons and assume and aspire
to a position of prominence that it has taken the true surgeon years of
the hardest, closest, most untiring study, observation and work to
reach. We are told as an excuse for this remarkable evolution from the
student to the surgeon that the young man of today is taught so much
more than the old men were; that the very manner of teaching, the
equipment of the schools and the superior requirements for matriculation
cannot but turn out better posted and more competent men. There is much
truth in this. There is much truth also in the fact that while more is
taught, more, infinitely more, is demanded of the student, and the
knowledge that would have secured him a diploma fifty years ago will now
scarcely carry him through his freshman year.

We also hear that "I want to be a surgeon, because surgery accomplished
positive results." This is very true also, and it is evident that if you
amputate a leg your patient will be minus a member. Don't lose sight of
another fact, however, that if without being competent to meet any
unforeseen emergency that may arise, you lightly open the abdominal
cavity, you will have a positive result in the shape of your own little
private graveyard. The newly graduated surgeon is not as dangerous as
the man who left medical school years ago, before the students received
one-third of the surgical training that they do now. Many of these men
have not taken a post-graduate course, have never been associated with a
hospital, nor have they had even an opportunity for moderate surgical
observation; and yet they are attempting to do the work that only a
skilled specialist should undertake. I am not speaking of emergency
surgery for which any man should try to prepare himself, and be brave
enough to undertake when human life is at stake. I am referring to
operations of election when the services of a competent man can be
secured. The point is just this, gentlemen, that medicine as a science
is the result of evolution and not the creation of some brilliant brain;
that what has been done in it has been accomplished not so much by
inspiration as by close plodding work, exhaustive experiment and
continual observation; that surgery as one of its branches cannot be
mastered in the four years of student life, but that to be surgeons you
must be workers and observers. It will not do to settle the matter by
saying that a man must make a start. This truth is too self-evident to
be smart, nor is it entirely convincing. An answer equally true will be
that you will not allow the embryo surgeon to start on you, and before
you put yourself or your wife or your mother in his hands you will
demand that he possess some other qualification for his specialty
besides his conceit, his gall and his need of the fee. There may be some
exceptions where the man is born and not made, but I beg to assure you
that the surgeon rarely springs full-fledged and fully fitted from the
brain of Minerva.

Our profession is nothing if not altruistic. It demands daily and hourly
more of self-sacrifice, more of self-devotion, than any secular calling.
Indeed, the comparison is often drawn between the nobility and necessity
of the duties which we perform and those of him who by divine
inspiration and laying on of hands has been called to succor the
diseased soul. It is not my place nor is it my purpose to enter into a
discussion of this point, and I mention it only to show that we are
marked men in every community; that we are placed on a higher plane and
that more is expected of us than of our brethren of the other liberal
professions. This, indeed, is right, for no man, the priest possibly
excepted, enters into such intimate relations with his people. He is
ever present with them to share their sorrows and their joys, and in his
position of family friend and family confessor it is his place to bind
and salve wounds more deadly than those made by the hand of man. It is a
popular impression that this close relationship between the physician
and his people is one evolved by the brain of the novelist or one
possessed by that most beloved, but now extinct, old family physician.
Let us get this impression from our minds and let us realize that our
duties, our responsibilities and our relationship to those we serve are
just the same, are just as close, and are just as engrossing as they
were when that dear old patriarch of the profession made his rounds,
scolding some, chiding others and advising all to better, purer and
nobler lives. Changed as our relationship to the community may be in
some respects by the translation of many of the brightest and best of
our cult into the ranks of the specialist, it is still and always will
be the general practitioner who is looked up to as "the physician," and
by his work in professional and private life our profession will be
judged.

In the beginning of my paper I stated I could do little more than
rehearse to you some of the old axioms and maxims that have been handed
down to us for generations. I am aware that I have taught you nothing
new tonight, and that I have not tapped that fountain of inspiration
from which genius gushes in poetic or oratorical streams. I trust I may
have convinced you that it is not amiss for us at times to hold close
communion with our souls, and to take stock of our moral and
professional assets. The further I have advanced the more fully I have
realized how impossible it is to evolve new ideas or elaborate new
creeds to supersede those by which the fathers lived and died and earned
honor for themselves and our profession.

So we face today, gentlemen, just about the same propositions that have
always been ours to meet, and what was ethical one hundred years ago is
ethical now.

The science of human duty simply demands that you be honest to
yourselves, honest to those you serve; that you may look every man
squarely in the face and not as if you feared he had heard something you
had said behind his back. May I quote to you the words of the Earl of
St. Vincent to the immortal Nelson: "It is given to us all to deserve
success; mortals cannot command it."




                     THE STUDY OF RECTAL SURGERY IN
                             NEW YORK CITY.

                      BY J. DAWSON REEDER, M. D.,
            _Lecturer on Osteology, University of Maryland,
                            Baltimore, Md._


Having decided to take a course in Rectal Surgery, I arrived in New York
and matriculated at the New York Polyclinic Hospital on October 1st for
a course of instructions under Prof. James P. Tuttle, and desire to
herewith describe briefly my reception:

Professor Tuttle is a finished surgeon of the old school of gentlemen, a
master of his art, and, under all conditions and circumstances, adheres
strictly to the ethics of the profession. I was not only most cordially
received by him socially, but was most fortunate in being honored by
requesting me to assist him, or be present, on operations upon his
private patients at an uptown hospital. This unexpected and friendly
honor gave me an opportunity to observe closely the work of this great
surgeon in detail, and I had the pleasure of witnessing every case under
his care during my three months' visit. As to his colossal work on
cancer of the rectum and sigmoid, his results are too well known for me
to dwell upon at this time, and he has an enviable record which makes
him the authority of this distressing malady which is so prevalent in
the cases referred to the Rectal surgeon, and have so long been
unrecognized by the general profession. I had the pleasure of witnessing
him extirpate the rectum by his bone-flap and perineal route, and in
some of these cases was honored by being his assistant. As to the method
and technique in each of the above mentioned, I will endeavor to give
later. Another very important point gained by association with this
surgeon was, that my own theory as to the merits of the Whitehead
operation were simply an endorsement of his teachings, namely, that this
particular operation, while classical, was only justifiable in selected
cases of hemorrhoids, while the Clamp and Cautery or the Ligature method
had no restrictions as to variety or location of the pile mass.

Another important subject was the question of treatment of Tubercular
fistula. For a number of years Dr. Tuttle said he was most discouraged
in his results and had almost abandoned any attempt to cure this class
of infections, but of late he had obtained most excellent results by
introducing his soft flexible probe and following this tract with a
grooved director; opening this throughout its entire extent, and then
completely cauterizing at dull red heat with the actual cautery. This is
then packed with iodoform gauze, and since using the cautery, his
results have been decidedly better. Under the direction of his
assistant, Dr. J. M. Lynch, a class of three was formed, with regular
work and instructions in the dispensary of St. Bartholomew's Clinic,
where we were given cases to diagnose and treat. This course consisted
in introduction of proctoscope and sigmoidscope diagnosis of ulcerations
specific and benign, and local treatment through this instrument. To the
inexperienced the results and probabilities gained through the use of
this pneumatic instrument of Tuttle's, which is a modification of the
Laws proctoscope, are surprising. By the electric illumination with
which it is equipped one is able to introduce the instrument with
absolute safety to the patient for a distance of 10 to 14 inches,
exploring the entire circumference from the anus up through the sigmoid.

My next course of instructions was under the direction of Prof. Samuel
Gant at the New York Post-Graduate Medical School. Dr. Gant likewise was
most cordial in his reception, and on several occasions honored me by
entertainments, including letters of membership to his club, and at his
home with his family. Dr. Gant, also a master of his art, has made a
reputation of renown, and is a most successful operator. While of an
entirely different character from that of Dr. Tuttle he is equally
attractive. Dr. Gant argues that the majority of cases of cancer when
seen by the specialist are too far advanced to offer any hope by radical
operation, and generally limits his attempts at relief to a colostomy.
As to the merits of this procedure, I am not sufficiently versed to
offer criticism further than to say that the results of Dr. Tuttle are
certainly encouraging to the surgeon who will undertake this ordeal of
extirpation in hopes of eradicating the disease, while Dr. Gant's
operation of colostomy, of course, is only palliative, he making no
claims of a cure, except when the growth is seen very early and is
freely movable; then he will extirpate.

As to the operation for hemorrhoids, Dr. Gant uses ligature and sterile
water anesthesia in nearly every case, and the patient is thereby cured
without the administration of a general anesthetic. The difference in
the time of recovery is a question to be always considered, in my own
judgment, and is as follows: Dr. Tuttle uses the clamp and cautery
almost universally, and the patient is discharged within the period of
one week, while the ligature method requires local treatments to the
ulcerations produced by the sluffing of the linen threads, and takes
from 10 days to three weeks.

Constipation and Obstipation are treated surgically by both of these
gentlemen by the operation of Sigmoidopexy or Colopexy, which consists
in anchoring the gut to the abdominal parietes after having first
stripped back the peritoneum over the area covered by their sutures.

Chronic diarrheas and Amœbic Dysentery are likewise treated by
Appendicostomy and Caecostomy. The difference in this operation being
that the former consists in delivering the appendix upon the abdomen and
fixing the same with catgut sutures until the peritoneal cavity is
walled off by adhesions, and then amputating later, so that the stump
may be dilated to permit of regular colonic irrigations.

Dr. Gant performs a similar operation, to which he has applied the name
of Caecostomy, and having devised an ingenious director consisting of
one metal rod within a tube of slightly larger calibre, he is able to
pass the obturator through the ileo-caecal valve, and then, by
withdrawing the rod or obturator, is able to pass a rubber catheter into
the small intestine. The metal tube is then withdrawn and a shorter
catheter is placed parallel with the long one, which necessarily is in
the caput, and after placing clips upon each tube to prevent leakage, he
is able to flush out both large and small bowel at desired intervals.

As to the irrigations through these newly-made openings, it is a matter
of choice with different operators, those in greatest favor, I think,
being Ice Water, Aq. Ext Krameria and Quinine Solution.

A very interesting case brought before us by Dr. Tuttle was one of
Specific Stricture of the Rectum, and the treatment anticipated is as
follows: He performed a Maydl-Reclus Colostomy in the transverse colon,
in order first to treat the ulcerations and infected area locally, and,
secondly, so that he would have sufficient gut above the stricture to do
a Perineal extirpation later and bring down new healthy intestine from
the upper Sigmoid for a new permanent anus; then later he would close
the artificial anus in the transverse colon, and his patient should have
a perfect result. The period required for these three operations would
cover a period of not less than nine months; and if after this there is
not perfect Sphincteric action, Dr. Tuttle does a plastic operation to
repair his sphincter.

Before continuing with a brief description of the technique of
Extirpation as above referred to, I wish to herewith express my sincere
gratitude and appreciation of the many honors and courtesies extended to
me by these gentlemen, and am quite sure that the same was not all
personal, but honor to the University of Maryland's Faculty of Physic,
who have aided so materially this younger specialty by such men as
Hemmeter, Pennington and Earle, who are constantly quoted by all
intestinal and rectal surgeons.


EXTIRPATION OF RECTUM.

The operation of removing the rectum is now almost two centuries old.
Faget performed it in 1739, but Listfrane first successfully extirpated
the rectum for cancer in 1826. The results of the operation in nine
cases were embodied in a thesis by one of his students (Penault, Thesis,
Paris, 1829), and in 1833 the great surgeon himself gave to the world a
complete account of his operation and method, thus establishing the
procedure as a surgical measure. The results in these cases were not
calculated to create any great enthusiasm, for the mortality was high
owing to the lack of aseptic technique. The methods described in older
books give us five varieties of operation for extirpation--the perineal,
the sacral, the vaginal, the abdominal and the combined. In this paper I
shall only endeavor to describe briefly the two methods used by Dr.
Tuttle. Before describing these methods in detail it may be well to
consider the preparation of the patient, which is practically the same
in each. In order to obtain the best results, it is necessary to
increase the patient's strength as far as possible by forced feeding for
a time, to empty the intestinal tract of all hard and putrifying faecal
masses, to establish as far as we may intestinal antisepsis and to
check, in a measure, the purulent secretion from the growth. It requires
from 7 to 10 days, or longer, to properly prepare a patient for this
operation. The diet best calculated to obtain a proper condition of the
intestinal tract is generally conceded to be a nitrogenous one. The
absolute milk diet is not so satisfactory as a mixed diet composed of
meat, strong broth, milk and a small quantity of bread and refined
cereals. The patient should be fed at frequent intervals, and as much as
he can digest. Along with this forced feeding one should administer
daily a saline laxative which will produce two or three thin movements,
and to disinfect the intestinal canal one should give through the
stomach three or four times a day sulpho-carbolate of zinc, grs. iiss.,
in form of an enteric pill. On the day previous to the operation the
perinaeum, sacral region and pubis should be shaved, dressed with a soap
poultice for two hours, then washed and dressed with bichloride
dressing, which should be retained until patient is anesthetized.
Notwithstanding all of these preparations, it is impossible to obtain
absolute asepsis of the affected area, and so many fatalities occur from
infection that it is deemed wise by many surgeons to make an artificial
inguinal anus as a preliminary procedure in all extirpations of the
rectum.


PERINEAL METHOD.

Under this method may be included certain operations for small
epitheliomas low down in the rectum done through the anus. The patient
having been properly prepared, the sphincter is thoroughly dilated; a
circular incision through the entire wall of the gut is made, and the
segment is caught with traction forceps and dragged by an assistant
while the operator frees, by scissors and blunt dissection, to a point
at least one-half inch above the cancer. The free end of the gut is then
tied with strong tape, as the temptation is very great to put your
finger in the bowel as a guide, and thereby invite infection. A deep
dorsal incision is then made, going down to the right of the coccyx
through the post-rectal tissue. The hand is then placed in the sacral
fossa and the structures lifted out into the pelvis, after which this
space is thoroughly packed with gauze to control the bleeding and hold
the structures out of the fossa. The edges of the wound, including each
half of the sphincter which has been cut posteriorly, are held by flat
retractors, while the operator proceeds to dissect the anterior portion
of the rectum loose from its attachments. A sound should be held in the
urethra in men and an assistant's finger in the vagina in women to
prevent wounding these organs. After the gut has been dissected out well
above the tumor, it is caught by clamps and cut off below these.
Bleeding is controlled by ligatures and equal parts of hot water and
alcohol. This newly-exposed gut is then sterilized by pure carbolic acid
and alcohol, or may be seared with cautery. Sometimes the peritoneum can
be stripped off from the rectum and its cavity need not be opened; it is
better, however, to open the cavity at once when the growth extends
above this point. The peritoneum is incised, cut loose from its
attachments close to the rectum, back to the mesorectum, which should be
cut close to the sacrum, in order to avoid the inferior mesenteric
artery. When the gut has been loosened sufficiently above the tumor, it
may be still fastened by two lateral peritoneal reflections, which are
the lateral rectal ligaments, and should be cut at once. The gut is then
brought down and sutured to the anus, and the operator should proceed to
close the peritoneum and restore the planes of the pelvic floor down to
the levator ani by fine catgut sutures. After this has been
accomplished, the anus, which is now well outside the operative field,
should be reopened, the gauze removed, and the gut flushed with a
solution of bichloride or peroxide of hydrogen. Quenu advises that in
amputating each layer should be cut separately, in order to avoid
hemorrhage, but there appears to be no advantage in this; in fact, we
are more likely to meet with deficient blood supply, causing subsequent
sloughing of the gut, than with hemorrhage. The posterior and anterior
portions of the perineal wound are packed with gauze and left open to
assure drainage, and the parts are covered with aseptic pads, held in
position by a well-fitting "T" bandage. A large drainage tube is passed
well up into the rectum, its lower end extending outside of the
dressings, in order to convey the discharges and gases beyond the
operative wound.


TUTTLE'S BONE FLAP OPERATION.

"The Kraske Operation" is applied to various methods in which access to
the rectum is obtained by removing the coccyx or cutting off certain
portions of the lower end of the sacrum. They are all modifications of
Kraske's original method, with which we are all familiar. Dr. Tuttle has
modified this plan, as it furnishes a rapid and adequate approach to the
rectum; it facilitates the control of hemorrhage and restores the bony
floor of pelvis and attachment of the anal muscles, and involves injury
of the sacral nerves and lateral sacral arteries on one side only. The
technique which he employs is as follows:

The patient is previously prepared as heretofore described, and an
artificial anus established or not, as the conditions indicate; before
the final scrubbing the sphincter should be dilated and the rectum
irrigated with bichloride 1-2000 or hydrogen peroxide. It should then be
packed with absorbent gauze, so that the finger cannot be introduced.
The patient is then placed in the prone position on the left side, with
the hips elevated on a hard pillow or sandbag; an oblique incision is
made from the level of the third foramen on right side of sacrum down to
the tip of the coccyx, and extending half-way between this point and the
posterior margin of the anus.

This incision should be made boldly with one stroke through the skin,
muscles and ligaments into the cellular tissue posterior to the rectum;
the rectum is then rapidly separated by the fingers from the sacrum, and
the space thus formed and the wound should be firmly packed with sterile
gauze. A transverse incision down to the bone is then made at a level of
the 4th sacral foramen, the bone is rapidly chiseled off in this line,
and the triangular flap is pulled down to the left side and held by
retractor. At this point it is usually necessary to catch and tie the
right lateral and middle sacral arteries. Frequently these are the only
vessels that need to be tied during the entire operation, although if
one cuts too far away from the sacrum, the right sciatic may be severed.
The first step in the actual extirpation of the rectum consists in
isolating the organ below the level of the resected sacrum, so that a
ligature can be thrown around it, or a long clamp applied to control any
bleeding from its walls. If the neoplasm extends above this level and it
is necessary to open the peritoneal cavity to extirpate it, one should
do this at once, as it will be found much easier to dissect the rectum
out by following the course of the peritoneal folds. By opening the
peritoneum and incising its lateral folds close to the rectum, the
danger of wounding the ureters is greatly decreased and the gut is much
more easily dragged down.

When the posterior peritoneal folds or meso-rectum is reached, the
incision should be carried as far away from the rectum, or, rather, as
close to the sacrum, as possible in order to avoid wounding the superior
hemorrhoids artery, and to remove all the sacral glands. The gut should
be loosened and dragged down until its healthy portion easily reaches
the anus or healthy segment below the growth. A strong clamp should then
be placed upon the intestine about one inch above the neoplasm, but
should never be placed in the area involved by it; for in so doing the
friable walls may rupture and the contents of the intestine be poured
out into the wound. As soon as the gut has been sufficiently liberated
and dragged down, the peritoneal cavity should be cleansed by wiping
with dry sterilized gauze and closed by sutures which attach the
membrane to the gut. By this procedure the entire intraperitoneal part
of the operation is completed and this cavity closed before the
intestine is incised. After this is done the gut should be cut across
between two clamps or ligatures above the tumor, the ends being
cauterized with carbolic acid and covered with rubber protective tissue.
The lower segment containing the neoplasm may then be dissected from
above downward in an almost bloodless manner until the lowest portion is
reached. It is much more easily removed in this direction than from
below upward, and there is less danger of wounding the other pelvic
organs. If the neoplasm extends within one inch of the anus, it will be
necessary to remove the entire lower portion of the rectum. If, however,
more than one inch of perfectly healthy tissue remains below, this
should always be preserved. Having removed the neoplasm, if one inch or
more of healthy gut remains above anus, one should unite the proximal
and distal ends either by Murphy button or end-to-end suture.

All oozing is checked by hot compresses, and the concavity of the sacrum
is packed with a large mass of sterilized gauze, the end of which
protrudes from the lower angle of the wound. This serves to check the
oozing, and also furnishes a support to the bone-flap after it has been
restored to position. Finally the flap is fastened in its original
position by silk-worm gut sutures, which pass deeply through the skin
and periosternum on each side of the transverse incision. Suturing the
bone itself is not necessary. The lateral portion of the wound is closed
by similar sutures down to the level of the sacro-coccygeal
articulation; below this it is left open for drainage (Tuttle, Diseases
of Rectum, Page 829-1903).




                     REPORT OF A CASE OF GANGRENOUS
                     APPENDICITIS, FROM THE SERVICE
                          OF PROF. R. WINSLOW.

                          BY C. C. SMINK, '09,
                       _Senior Medical Student_.


In selecting a case I have not taken one that is a surgical curiosity,
or at all an unusual one, but I have taken this because it is just in
these cases that a doubt sometimes exists as to the treatment when
diagnosed, and often the condition of the appendix and surrounding
peritoneum is in doubt, even if a diagnosis of trouble originating in
the appendix is made.

_History of Case_--Patient, a boy, L. W., age 9 years, schoolboy;
admitted December 26, 1908, with a diagnosis of appendicitis.

_Family History_--Parents well; one brother died in infancy, cause
unknown; two brothers living and well; only history of any family
disease is tuberculosis in one uncle; no rheumatism, syphilis, gout,
haemophilia or other disease bearing on the case.

_Past History_--Measles at 5 years, with uneventful recovery;
whooping-cough at 6, no complications; badly burned two years ago; has
had "indigestion" (?) since he was 3 years old; pain but no tenderness
during these attacks; treated by different physicians and got better for
a time; no history of scarlet fever, influenza, pneumonia, typhoid or
other disease of childhood.

_Habits_--A normal child.

_Present Illness_--On 20th of December, 1908, patient came home from
church complaining of pains in the right side. This was Sunday. Next day
he complained of severe pain all over abdomen, but on Tuesday these
became localized in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. Had some
fever. Bowels constipated. No nausea or vomiting. There was a localized
tenderness in the right lower quadrant from the start. Pains got better
on Friday, but temperature and pulse still stayed up, and patient came
into hospital on Saturday, December 26. The unusual feature was that
there was no nausea or vomiting. It is also to be noted that the pain
subsided suddenly on the 24th. The child entered hospital on the 26th,
and on entrance the whole right side was rigid, while the left side was
comparatively soft. A lump could be felt in the appendical region, the
centre of which was above McBurney's point. Temperature was 99 and pulse
78. The leucocyte count, however, was 30,200; urine negative.

Child was put to bed; an ice cap placed on the abdomen. Liquid diet. The
next day, December 27th, leucocytes stood at 35,200. Temperature
unchanged, but the pulse had risen to 110 beats. A hypodermic of
morphine and atropine was given, and patient taken to the operating
room, anesthetized, and abdomen cleaned for an aseptic (if possible)
operation.

Prof. Winslow made an incision in the abdominal wall, well out toward
the crest of the ilium, using the gridiron incision. The caecum was
found and pulled over toward the middle line, and in looking for the
appendix, which was supposed to be behind the caecum, a great quantity
of pus was found. This nasty smelling, grayish pus welled up into the
wound and was sponged away. Several pieces of mucous membrane and
presumably the tip of the appendix were found in the pus. Also several
faecal secretions. The pus was sponged away and carefully a search was
made for the appendix, or rather what remained of it. It was found tied
down by adhesions and dissected loose. It broke away in pieces, and it
was unnecessary to ligate any of the arteries of the meso appendix. The
stump of the appendix close to the caecum was crushed, cauterized and
ligated. No attempt was made to invert it, as the tissues would not
stand it. The pus cavity was found to extend up behind the caecum and
over toward the median line for some distance. The puncture, which I
will refer to later, was then made in the right lumbar region, and two
cigarette drains were introduced extending clear back into the bottom of
the abscess cavity. Then a gauze drain was introduced into the anterior
wound, and this sutured up. The wound was then dressed and the patient
taken to the ward. Recovery from anesthetic without ill effects.

The next morning the patient was unable to pass his water, and had to be
catheterized. Aside from this no ill effects were seen, and his
temperature and pulse remained practically at the same place. At the end
of 48 hours the drains and dressings were changed and the patient was
doing well and the wound draining profusely. At no time was the bed
elevated and at no time was a stimulant administered, with the exception
of a hot normal salt enema on the day following the operation. Several
times during his stay a dose of castor oil was given, but no other
medication was necessary. As the dressings were reapplied and drains
introduced daily the wounds were found to be granulating up, and
gradually these closed, first the one in the lumbar region and then the
one in the abdomen. By the tenth day a normal temperature was present,
and he sat up on the twelfth.

The child went on to an uneventful recovery, and went home on January
21st fully cured.

This was undoubtedly one of those cases of gangrenous appendicitis
where, owing either to the intensity of the infection or to a thrombosis
of the vessels supplying the appendix, the vitality of the tissues is
lost and gangrene results. Now, "even in this, the gravest form of
appendicitis, the general peritoneal cavity is often protected against
infection by walling off the pus, and the appendix, detached in the form
of a slough, is often found on opening the localized abscess." But "in
other cases there is from the beginning the symptoms of peritoneal
sepsis and peritonitis."

Now, it seems to me that a great deal depends on the kind of
infection--or, rather, the kind of organism infecting--and often the
difference between a localized abscess and a general peritonitis is
really the difference between a colon and a streptococcus infection.
Again, should a general peritonitis develop, I have noticed from a
number of cases in the wards that the prognosis practically depends on
the organism, although we all know that a general peritonitis is a
mighty grave condition, no matter what it is due to.

Another point in favor of the child was the fact that the gangrenous
process seemed to start in the tip of the appendix, and it seems that
when it starts there, there is greater likelihood of localization, and
when it starts in the base a greater likelihood of general peritonitis.

I said that there was often doubt as to the condition in the abdomen in
these cases. Now, there can be no doubt that the two main points in the
diagnosis of a localized abscess are tumor and an aggravation of the
symptoms present. But this case exemplified the fact that there may be
cases where there is no aggravation of symptoms, and in a great many
cases it may be impossible to feel the tumor until it has become very
large, owing to its situation, viz., post caecal. Even in this case,
from which a great quantity of pus was evacuated, there was no absolute
certainty of finding pus on opening the abdomen, although it was
suspected strongly.

I have seen a patient walk into the hospital on Sunday with a
temperature of 100 and a pulse of 99, and when the abdomen was opened on
Monday morning a most virulent form of general streptococcus peritonitis
was found, from which the patient died the next day. It is said that it
is much better to depend on the pulse and its variations than on the
temperature.

I would like to call attention to several points in the treatment of
this case also.

First, the place of incision was, as I said, well up towards the iliac
crest, and not in the time-honored McBurney point. The wisdom of this is
self-evident.

Second, the care used in not breaking up the wall of the abscess formed
by the peritoneum.

Also, the fact that the appendix was carefully dissected up and tied off
and allowed to heal by itself, obviating, as much as possible, the
danger of a faecal fistula. The older books advised evacuating the
abscess and leaving the appendix to slough off, and, while I have seen
seven cases where this method was used and not a single faecal fistula,
yet it seems to me the more rational treatment to remove the offender,
as I have also assisted in three operations where the appendix was
removed at the second operation. That is, an operation supposedly an
appendectomy was done, and later, at a subsequent period, the diseased
appendix was found still causing the same old trouble.

Again, the use of the lumbar puncture, so as to drain the abscess cavity
from its very bottom. I wonder this is not done oftener, as it appeals
to me as being a most sensible thing.

Then the abscess cavity was sponged out with gauze, and not washed out
with the antiseptic fluid that books advise, thus spreading bacteria all
over the peritoneal cavity, and really doing no good. Nature was allowed
to throw off such things as she deemed necessary, an avenue of escape
having been provided.

And, lastly, the omentum was found and brought down, covering in the
cavity as much as possible, and thus aiding in the walling off process.




                          DIRECT LARYNGOSCOPY.

                     BY RICHARD H. JOHNSTON, M. D.

            _Read Before the Baltimore City Medical Society,
                    Section on Medicine and Surgery,
                            February, 1909._


Direct laryngoscopy, as the name implies, is the inspection of the
larynx through a hollow tube without the use of a mirror. The
examination is made with the patient in the sitting position, under
local anesthesia, or in the prone position, under general anesthesia. To
examine the larynx in the sitting position it is practically always
necessary to give a hypodermic injection of morphia and atropia a half
hour beforehand, to relax the muscles and to prevent excessive
secretion. The patient is seated upon a low stool with the head extended
and supported by an assistant. With curved forceps 20% cocaine or 25%
alypin solution is quickly passed into the throat, anesthetizing
pharynx, tongue and epiglottis. Jackson's slide speculum is then
introduced and the base of the tongue, with the epiglottis, gently
pulled forward. At this point it is usually necessary to use more
cocaine directly in the larynx, which is introduced by means of special
cotton carriers. In a few minutes anesthetization is complete, and the
examination can be made at leisure. It will be found easier to inspect
the different parts of the larynx if the head is held about halfway
between the erect position and complete extension. In some patients with
short, thick necks and large middle incisor teeth the slide will have to
be removed from the speculum to enable one to see well. The examination
in the prone position under general anesthesia is made with the
patient's head over the end of the table supported by an assistant. The
speculum is introduced and the base of the tongue and the epiglottis
pulled upward forcibly. In this position direct laryngoscopy, even in
children, is unsatisfactory, and operative procedures are well-nigh
impossible on account of the muscular rigidity. The force required to
lift the tissues is so great and the position of the arm is so cramped
that it is difficult to get a clear view of the field. The difficulty
has impressed all who have worked in this particular line. It remained
for Dr. H. P. Mosher, of Boston, to discover a method of direct
laryngoscopy which makes it as simple under ether anesthesia as in the
sitting position. In April, 1908, he described in the _Boston Medical
and Surgical Journal_ the "left lateral position" for examining the
larynx and the upper end of the esophagus. He designed certain
instruments which I believe are too cumbersome to meet with popular
favor. In Mosher's position the patient lies on the table with the head
turned toward the left until the cheek almost rests on the table; the
chin is flexed on the chest. In our work at the Presbyterian Hospital we
have found a modified Mosher's position and Jackson's child speculum the
ideal combination for the examination in the prone patient. In children
the procedure is carried out with or without anesthesia. Without
anesthesia the head, hands and feet are held, the chin is flexed on the
chest in a normal position by placing a pillow under the head, the
speculum is introduced and the larynx inspected. In adults under
anesthesia the same procedure is used, and will be found much simpler
than the extended position. In adults, after the speculum is in
position, if the anterior part of the larynx is not seen, gentle
pressure on the thyroid cartilage will bring the anterior commissure
into view. Operations can be done through the tube satisfactorily. With
the different methods of direct laryngoscopy it is possible to remove
any growth from the larynx.

919 N. Charles Street.




                                 ITEMS.


The Board of Trustees of the Permanent Endowment Fund of the University
held its annual meeting on January 11. Judge Stockbridge was re-elected
president and Mr. J. Harry Tregoe secretary-treasurer, and, with Dr.
Samuel C. Chew and Judge Sams, constitute the executive committee for
the year 1909. The funds and securities in hand total the gross sum of
$18,635.74.

                                -------

A special meeting of the Washington Branch of the General Alumni
Association was held at the office of the president, Dr. Monte Griffith,
March 11, 1909, to consider the advisability of petitioning the Board of
Regents to establish a Board of Alumni Counsellors, a paid president and
a Board of Trustees, independent of the teaching faculties. Resolutions
in favor of these measures were adopted.

                                -------

Dr. Louis W. Knight, class of 1866, of Baltimore, has presented to
Loyola College a valuable collection of papal medals.

                                -------

Drs. H. O. and J. N. Reik have removed their offices to 506 Cathedral
street.

                                -------

Drs. W. D. Scott and W. E. Wiegand attended the banquet of the Virginia
Military Institute Alumni Association of Baltimore, held at the New
Howard House, March 2, 1909. Dr. W. D. Scott responded to the toast "The
Younger Generation and the Splendid Work of the Virginia Military
Institute Today."

                                -------

Major William F. Lewis, class of 1893, U. S. A. Medical Corps, has been
relieved from duty at Fort Thomas and ordered to sail on June 5, 1909,
for the Philippine Islands, via San Francisco, for duty.

                                -------

Dr. Hugh A. Maughlin, class of 1864, of 121 North Broadway, an official
in the United States Custom Service, who was assistant surgeon in the
Sixth Maryland Regiment during the Civil War, is dangerously ill of
pleurisy at his home. Dr. Maughlin is a member of Wilson Post, G. A. R.

                                -------

Dr. James A. Nydegger, class of 1892, past assistant surgeon, United
States Public Health and Marine Hospital Service, has been promoted to
the rank of surgeon.

                                -------

Dr. Eugene H. Mullan, class of 1903, assistant surgeon, United States
Public Health and Marine Hospital Service, has been commissioned a past
assistant surgeon, to rank as such from February 2, 1909.

                                -------

Dr. Samuel T. Earle, Jr., of Baltimore, Md., records the case of Mrs. F.
H. D., who, the latter part of August, 1907, while eating ham, swallowed
a plate with two false teeth. Ten days later she had a violent attack of
pain in the abdomen, followed by a chill and fever. There was no
recurrence of this for one and a half months. Since then they have
recurred from time to time, but not as severe, nor have they been
attended with chill and fever. A diagram taken of the lower abdominal
and pelvic regions showed the plate in the sigmoid flexure of the colon,
on a level with the promontory of the sacrum. Examination through the
sigmoidoscope brought it into view at the point shown by the X-ray.
There was considerable tenesmus, and the passage of a good deal of
mucous, also a tendency to constipation. Under the influence of two
hypodermics of morphine, gr. 1-4, hyoscine hydrobromate, gr. gr. L-100,
and cactina, which produced satisfactory anesthesia, Dr. Earle was able
to grasp the plate through the sigmoidoscope with a pair of long
alligator forceps, and withdraw it immediately behind the sigmoidoscope.

                                -------

At the Conference on Medical Legislation, held in Washington, D. C.,
January 18-20, 1909, resolutions were adopted providing for a committee
composed of one member each from the medical departments of the Army and
the Navy, one from the Public Health and Marine Hospital Service, one
member from the District of Columbia and one member from the Council on
Medical Legislation, to present to the medical profession the conditions
under which the widow of Major James Carroll is now placed, and to
devise such plans as might seem advisable for her relief. The following
committee was appointed: Major M. W. Ireland, U. S. A.; Surgeon W. H.
Bell. U. S. N.; Dr. John F. Anderson, U. S. Public Health and Marine
Hospital Service; Dr. John D. Thomas, Washington, D. C., and Dr. A. S.
Von Mansfelde, of Ashland, Nebraska.

Mrs. Carroll has been granted a pension of $125 a month on which to
support herself, seven young children and the aged mother of her
husband. The house, which Major Carroll had partly paid for, is
mortgaged for $5,000. Since the conference adjourned the medical
officers of the Army have raised enough to pay the taxes on the house,
one monthly note of $50 and the overdue interest on the first mortgage,
amounting to $125. Believing that the members of the medical profession
will wish to contribute toward a fund for the purpose of paying the
balance due on the house, the committee requests contributions of any
amount. They may be sent to Major M. W. Ireland, United States Army,
Washington, D. C. The editors of THE BULLETIN sincerely hope our alumni
will honor the memory of our most distinguished alumnus by contributing
liberally to this most worthy cause.

                                -------

At the last regular meeting of the University of Maryland Medical
Association, held in the amphitheatre of the University Hospital,
Tuesday, March 16, 1909, the program was as follows: 1, "The General
Practitioner: His Relation to His Patients, to His Fellow Practitioners
and to the Community in Which He Lives," Dr. Guy Steele, Cambridge, Md.;
2, "Medical Ethics," Dr. Samuel C. Chew. Dr. A. M. Shipley, the
president, was in the chair, and called the meeting to order promptly at
8.30 P. M. The attendance was large and appreciative, and listened to
two remarkably able addresses. Those who had the privilege and pleasure
of listening to the words of wisdom and advice both of Dr. Chew and Dr.
Steele went away with a clearer conception of their duties to their
professional brethren and the public.

Immediately after the adjournment of the Medical Association the Adjunct
Faculty, with its president, Dr. Joseph W. Holland, in the chair, held a
very important meeting, the gist of which is as follows: Resolved by the
Adjunct Faculty of the Medical Department of the University of Maryland
that the Board of Regents be implored to effect such changes in the
charter as to make possible the election of a president with a fixed
salary, and with the duties usually associated with that office in
standard universities, and a Board of Administrators independent of
teaching faculties. The Adjunct Faculty also endorsed tentative plans
looking towards the formation of an advisory board of alumni
counsellors.

                                -------

At the meeting of the Section on Ophthalmology and Otology, Thursday,
March 11, 1909, at the Faculty Hall, the following of our alumni read
papers: "Rodent Ulcer of the Cornea (Ulcus Rodens Mooren), with
Exhibition of the Case," Dr. R. L. Randolph; "Purulent Otitis Media of
Infancy and Childhood," Dr. H. O. Reik.

                                -------

At the meeting of the Section on Neurology and Psychiatry, Friday, March
12, 1909, the following participated:

"History and Forms of Chorea," Dr. N. M. Owensby;

"Etiology of Chorea, Dr. H. D. McCarty;

"Treatment of Chorea," Dr. W. S. Carswell.

                                -------

The Baltimore _Star_ of March 27th, 1909, has this to say concerning
Prof. Randolph Winslow: "Prof. Randolph Winslow, head of the Department
of Surgery of the University of Maryland, is one of the best-known
lecturers and demonstrators in the East. He is a close student, and has
the faculty of impressing the young men of the University with the force
of and practicability of his knowledge. Professor Winslow stands high in
medical and surgical circles of the country, and ranks with the best
surgeons." Under the caption of the leading men of Maryland _The Star_
also included a photograph of Professor Winslow. By honoring Dr. Winslow
_The Star_ also honors the University of Maryland, whose authorities
feel a natural pride in the eminent position held by its professors.

Dr. Fitz Randolph Winslow, class of 1906, a former resident physician in
the University Hospital, and a resident of Baltimore, has located at
Hinton, Virginia.

                                -------

The Phi Sigma Kappa Fraternity had an at-home Saturday, March 27, 1909.

                                -------

About sixty members of the Theta Nu Epsilon Fraternity, University of
Maryland, attended a banquet at the Belvedere recently. It was served in
the main hall, and the tables, which formed a semicircle, were
beautifully decorated with trailing asparagus and cut flowers. During
the meal a string orchestra rendered popular selections. Dr. Arthur M.
Shipley, toastmaster, introduced Mr. Frederick W. Rankin, who made the
address of welcome. Mr. Rankin was followed by Dr. C. H. Richards, who
responded to the toast "Past and Present;" Dr. W. D. Scott had as his
subject "The Fraternity Man;" Dr. R. Dorsey Coale, "The Undergraduate;"
Dr. Randolph Winslow, "The Near Doctor;" Dr. John C. Hemmeter, "Our
University," and Mr. C. B. Mathews, "The Ladies." The reception
committee in charge of the arrangements was as follows: Frederick W.
Rankin, chairman; Ross S. McElwee; John W. Robertson, John S. Mandigo,
Arthur L. Fehsenfeld, J. F. Anderson.

                                -------




                                DEATHS.


Dr. Joseph R. Owens, class of 1859, mayor of Hyattsville, Md., and
treasurer of the Maryland Agricultural College, died at his home, in
Hyattsville, March 15, 1909, after a lingering illness of six months.
Death came peacefully, and at the bedside were his wife, who was Miss
Gertrude E. Councilman, of Worthington Valley, Baltimore county, Md.;
his daughter, Mrs. Geo. B. Luckey, and his son, Charles C. Owens, of New
York. Besides these he is survived by his mother, Mrs. Percilla Owens,
90 years of age; a son, Mr. L. Owens, of New York, and a daughter, Mrs.
A. A. Turbeyne, of England.

Dr. Owens was born in Baltimore, February 20, 1839, and was 70 years
old. His parents removed to West River when he was seven years of age.
When he was ten years old he entered Newton Academy, Baltimore, and in
1859 was graduated from the Medical Department of the University of
Maryland. Immediately after leaving the University he was appointed
resident physician at the Baltimore City Almshouse, and served in this
capacity to 1861, when he returned to Anne Arundel county and began
farming on West River. In 1885 he removed to Hyattsville and accepted
the position of clerk of the Claims Division of the Treasury Department,
Washington. He held this office until 1890, when he was named as
treasurer of the Maryland Agricultural College, which position he filled
until death. For several years Dr. Owens was collector of taxes in Anne
Arundel county. When the municipal government of Hyattsville was changed
from a board of commissioners to a mayor and common council, Dr. Owens
was elected councilman from the Third ward, and served with marked
ability until May, 1906, when he was elected mayor.

He was elected for three consecutive terms without opposition, and was
foremost in every move tending to the advancement of the town. As
treasurer of the Maryland Agricultural College he became acquainted with
many of the leading men of the State, by whom he was held in the highest
esteem. He was secretary of the Vansville Farmers' Club for many years,
a director of the First National Bank of Hyattsville. Interment was in
the cemetery adjoining Old St. James' Protestant Episcopal Church, near
West River, Anne Arundel county. The coffin was borne from his late
residence, Hill Top Lodge, by seven cadets of the Agricultural
College--Cadet-Major Mayor, Captains Burrough and Jassell, Lieutenant
Jarrell and Sergeants Freere, Saunders and Cole. A squad of 25 cadets,
five from each class of the College, under command of Captain Gorsuch,
escorted the body to Pinkey Memorial Church, where the Episcopal burial
service was read by Rev. Henry Thomas, rector of St. Matthew's Parish,
of which Dr. Owens had been registrar and a member of the vestry for
several years. The body, preceded by the college cadets, was taken to
the Chesapeake Beach Railway Station and shipped to Lyons Creek, and
thence to St. James' Church. Rev. Henry Thomas officiated at the grave.
The pall-bearers were: Messrs. Wirt Harrison, Harry W. Dorsey, E. B.
Owens, O. H. Carr, T. Sellman Hall and E. A. Fuller. A special meeting
of the Mayor and Common Council was held in Heptasophs' Hall March 22,
1909, to take action upon the death of Dr. Joseph R. Owens, late Mayor
of Hyattsville. Acting Mayor John Fainter Jr., was chairman and Town
Clerk G. H. Carr was secretary. Former Mayor Dr. C. A. Wells eulogized
the late Mayor, both as a public official and a private citizen. Dr.
Joseph A. Mudd, W. P. Magruder, R. E. White, J. W. Aman and Edward
Devlin, all members of the Council who served with Dr. Owens, and R. W.
Wells, M. J. Smith and S. J. Kelly, the last named as members of the
present Council, also made appropriate addresses. It was resolved that
in the passing away of Dr. Joseph R. Owens, Mayor of Hyattsville, we
have lost a conscientious official, a valued associate and a personal
friend, and the citizens of Hyattsville at large, as well as his
official associates, have experienced a bereavement, the effects of
which they will ever feel.

                                -------

Dr. Asa S. Linthicum, class of 1852, a former member of the Board of
County Commissioners of Anne Arundel county, died at his home, in
Jessup, Md., Sunday, March 28, 1909, from apoplexy, aged 78. About 25
years ago Dr. Linthicum retired from the active practice of medicine to
engage in iron ore mining.

Dr. Linthicum's wife, who died about five years ago, was Miss Nettie
Crane, of Clifton Springs, N. J. Interment was in Loudon Park Cemetery,
Baltimore.

                                -------

Dr. John Bailey Mullins, class of 1887, of Washington, D. C., a member
of the American Medical Association and the American Society of
Laryngology and Otology, formerly of Norfolk, Va., died at his home, in
Washington, D. C., from cerebral hemorrhage, February 11, 1909, aged 42.

Resolutions on the death of Dr. John Bailey Mullins:

WHEREAS, It has been God's purpose to suddenly call hence one of our
most useful and beloved members; be it

_Resolved_, By the Washington Branch of the General Alumni Association
of the University of Maryland, that we are deeply grieved by the
premature death of our honored associate. By his death the public,
especially those worthy of charity, whom he was ever ready to serve,
have lost a most useful citizen, the medical profession a skilled and
painstaking physician and surgeon, and the University of Maryland an
able and active worker. And be it further

_Resolved_, That the sympathy of this Association be extended to his
daughter, whom he loved before all else on earth, and to whom he was
ever a dutiful father. And be it further

_Resolved_, That these resolutions be spread upon the minutes of our
Association and a copy of the same be sent to the parent Alumni
Association in Baltimore.

Committee--I. S. Stone, William L. Robbins, Harry Hurtt, Monte Griffith,
president; W. M. Simpkins, secretary.

                                -------

Dr. Samuel Groome Fisher, class of 1854, of Port Deposit, Md., died at
the home of his son, in Port Deposit, February 22, 1909, aged 77. For
more than 50 years Dr. Fisher was a practitioner of Chestertown, Md.

                                -------

Dr. Charles Brewer, class of 1855, of Vineland, N. J., died at his home,
in Vineland, March 3, 1909, aged 76. From 1858 to the outbreak of the
Civil War he was a member of the Medical Corps of the Army, and during
the war a surgeon in the Confederate States service. Under President
Cleveland he was postmaster at Vineland, N. J., and resident physician
at the State Prison, Trenton, from 1891 to 1896.

                                -------

Dr. William F. Chenault, class of 1888, of Cleveland, N. C., a member of
the Medical Society of the State of North Carolina, died at his home, in
Cleveland, N. C., February 24, 1909, from cerebral hemorrhage, aged 46.

                                -------

Dr. James B. R. Purnell, class of 1850, of Snow Hill, Maryland, died at
his home, in Snow Hill, March 7, 1909, from senile debility, aged 80. He
was vice-president of the Medical and Chirurgical Faculty of Maryland in
1900-1901, formerly physician to the county almshouse and health officer
of Worcester county.

                                -------

Dr. Benjamin Franklin Laughlin, class of 1904, of Kingwood, West
Virginia, died at the home of his father, in Deer Park, Md., from
paralysis, March 9, 1909, aged 31.


=IN PNEUMONIA= the inspired air should be rich in oxygen and
comparatively cool, while the surface of the body, especially the
thorax, should be kept warm, lest, becoming chilled, the action of the
phagocytes in their battle with the pneumococci be inhibited.

                           _Antiphlogistine_

                      (_Inflammation's Antidote_)

applied to the chest wall, front, sides and back, hot and thick,
stimulates the action of the phagocytes and often turns the scale in
favor of recovery.

=Croup.=--Instead of depending on an emetic for quick action in croup,
the physician will do well to apply Antiphlogistine hot and thick from
ear to ear and down over the interclavicular space. The results of such
treatment are usually prompt and gratifying.

Antiphlogistine hot and thick is also indicated in Bronchitis and
Pleurisy

                  *       *       *       *       *


                =The Denver Chemical Mfg. Co. New York=

                  *       *       *       *       *

Certain as it is that a single acting cause can bring about any one of
the several anomalies of menstruation, just so certain is it that a
single remedial agent--if properly administered--can effect the relief
of any one of those anomalies.

¶ The singular efficacy of Ergoapiol (Smith) in the various menstrual
irregularities is manifestly due to its prompt and direct analgesic,
antispasmodic and tonic action upon the entire female reproductive
system.

¶ Ergoapiol (Smith) is of special, indeed extraordinary, value in such
menstrual irregularities as _amenorrhea_, _dysmenorrhea_, _menorrhagia_
and _metrorrhagia_.

¶ The creators of the preparation, the Martin H. Smith Company, of New
York, will send samples and exhaustive literature, post paid, to any
member of the medical profession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           Transcriber's Note

The original spelling and punctuation has been retained, accept for
confirmed typos.

Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.

Italicized words and phrases in the text version are presented by
surrounding the text with underscores(_).

Bold words and phrases in the text version are presented by surrounding
the text with equals sign (=).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hospital Bulletin, Vol. V, No. 2,
April 15, 1909, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOSPITAL BULLETIN, APRIL 15, 1909 ***

***** This file should be named 53827-0.txt or 53827-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/8/2/53827/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

